I want to start with a quote by Bill
Gates on Bill Gates and then I want to
tell you this excellent Larry Ellison
quote on Bill Gates that I found. So
first this is Bill Gates on Bill Gates.
He says a key advantage I had was being
fanatical. That is taking all of my
capabilities day and night and just
focusing on how do you write good
software. I loved being a fanatic.
Eventually I reveled in it. I didn't
believe in weekends. I didn't believe in
vacations. For a lot of people, it
wasn't an ideal place to work. We were
pretty frantic and demanding. And then
here's the quote from Larry Ellison on
Bill Gates. Keep in mind, Larry Ellison
and Bill Gates were very fierce
competitors. This is what Larry Ellison
said. Bill Gates is one of the most
remarkable business people I've ever
met. Some people say Bill is the most
brilliant guy that they've ever met.
There are a lot of really brilliant
scientists in our business. Forgive me.
There are a lot of people in the world
smarter than Bill Gates. There are very
few people in the world that have his
focus and endurance.
Someone once said, "Bill wants people to
think that he is Thomas Edison when he
is really Rockefeller." If he was
Edison, he would be less dangerous. He
is utterly relentless. He is
indehaticable. He is absolutely focused
and he wants it all. Barry Diller said
he is young and he's mean and he's not
tired. That's a high compliment coming
from Barry Diller. Bill is tough and he
wants it all and I have incredible
respect for that man. So recently Bill
Gates just wrote an autobiography. It's
called Source Code. It covers his early
childhood and his life up until founding
Microsoft and a few short years after
that. And so originally this episode was
just going to be about what I learned by
reading Source Code. So, what I decided
to do instead is I want to make a how
Bill Gates works episode, very similar
to the How Elon Works episode I just
did. And so, I grabbed all the notes and
highlights from source code and four
other books that I've read on Bill
Gates. And then I stripped away
everything that wasn't his approach to
building his company. And so, I'm going
to go through book by book. So, let's
start with source code. A lot of this
that I pulled off from source code is
you see one of the the things that the
genius things that that Bill Gates did
is he designed a company that was
natural to him that benefited from his
innate talents and personality. So he
says by the time I was in my early teens
my parents had accepted that I was
different from many of my peers and had
come to terms with the fact that I
needed a certain amount of independence
in making my way through the world. From
a very early age, Bill Gates discovered
that he liked being what he what did he
say earlier? I was a fanatic. He liked
being obsessed. And fortunately, the
school he went to, which is called
Lakeside, had access, which is extremely
rare at this point in history, to a
computer. Lakeside had set up a way for
students to connect with a big mainframe
computer over a phone line. It was
incredibly rare back then for teenagers
to have access to a computer in any
form. And so as soon as Bill discovers
this, he says, "We really took to it. We
devoted all of our free time to writing
programs, and he found the perfect
activity and hobby that aligned with his
innate personality." He says,
"Programming fit me because it allowed
me to define my own measures of success,
and it seemed limitless. The logic,
focus, and stamina needed to write long,
complicated programs came naturally to
me. I would retreat into my own
thoughts. I would picture computer code
in my mind." And one of the things that
young Bill Gates is going to discover,
like many of history's greatest
entrepreneurs uh did before him, is that
constraints are your friend. Small was
key. Computers back then had very little
memory, which meant programs had to be
lean, written using as little code as
possible so not to hog memory. Like the
famous line, I would have written a
shorter letter, but I did not have time.
It is easier to write a program in
sloppy code that goes on for pages than
to write the same program on a single
page. This goes back to an idea that has
popped up the last few weeks with you
and I when we talked about James Dyson
believe that lean engineering is good
engineering. Elon Musk would say the
same thing. Bill Gates would say the
same thing. Lean engineering is good
engineering. Now what is so fascinating
about this is that you will see that
Bill also ran his business this way. He
has a visceral like disgusting reaction.
He just hates waste and inefficiencies.
And one of the ways this manifested was
Bill was obsessed with cost control and
he is constantly hounding everyone in
the company about it. This will come up
many many times in every book that you
read about Bill Gates in Microsoft.
Actually, one of my favorite stories
about this is I got to spend a bunch of
time with John Mackey, who's the founder
of Whole Foods. And during one of our
conversations, John told me one of the
craziest things that anyone has ever
said about this podcast because before
by the time me and John met, he had
listened to over a hundred episodes of
Founders. And he told me that if
Founders existed when he was younger,
that Whole Foods would still be an
independent company that since the
podcast and all of history's greatest
entrepreneurs are constantly emphasizing
the importance of controlling expenses,
he would have put more of a priority on
it. Especially during good times, during
boom times. It is very natural for a
company and really for human nature to
just not watch your costs as closely
because everything is going so well.
That is something I was talking about
with my friend Eric who's the co-founder
and CEO of RAMP. Ramp is the presenting
sponsor of founders and way before they
were the presenting sponsor of Founders.
I had known all the co-founders of RAMP
and had spent a bunch of time with them.
They all had listened to the podcast and
they picked up on the fact that the main
theme, one of the main themes of
founders is the importance of watching
your cost and controlling your spend and
how doing so gives you a massive
competitive advantage. This is something
Bill Gates understood intuitively and
implemented incessantly. Wait till we
get to these parts. I think it's going
to blow your mind. Warren Buffett said
that a good manager of a business should
be a demon on costs. Bill Gates was
exactly that and that is a main theme
for RAMP. The reason that RAMP exists is
to give you everything you need to
control your spend. Ramp gives you
everything you need to control your
costs. They give you easy to use
corporate cards for your entire team,
automated expense reporting and cost
control. RAMP helps you run an efficient
organization which Bill Gates was
obsessed with doing. And RAM does this
all on a single platform. Make history's
greatest entrepreneurs proud by going to
ramp.com to learn how they can help your
business today. That is ramp.com. So in
addition to having a distaste for
inefficiency, a distaste for waste,
having the ability to hyperfocus,
two other traits of Bill Gates that are
present in his early childhood that will
never leave him and are are very present
as he's building Microsoft is the fact
that he is ruthlessly competitive and
full of energy. And so he would tell
stories in the book in source code about
the fact that even when he was a kid, he
had uh sisters that they would play all
kinds of board games. So, Monopoly,
Risk, Card Games, and he says they had
to turn everything into a competitive
sport. That they would buy two copies of
the same puzzle and then they'd race to
see who would finish first. And then he
says his other notable early trait was
excess energy. He says, "I rocked."
Rocking while you you'll see this in any
interviews. There's also a great
documentary on Bill Gates on Netflix
where he's constantly rocking. So, he
says, "I rocked." Rocking while sitting,
rocking while standing. anytime I got to
really thinking about something, rocking
was like a metronome for my brain and it
still is. And then another trait that's
really important to understand about
Bill Gates because he again all we're
talking about is how what the ideas he
used and the personality traits he used
to build his business. He is incredibly
combative and the first main person he
was combative with was his mother
because she tried to control him. Bill
Gates is unmanageable and eventually his
parents figured this out. He says, "My
parents knew that the rhythm of my mind
was different from the other kids. My
sister did what she was told. She played
easily with other kids and from the
start got good grades. I did none of
these things. I was an aggressive,
rebellious child. You will be the same
kind of founder. I was described as
hyperinetic, brainy, contrarian, and
temptuous. My teachers and my parents
noted at an early age of what was to
come. I channeled intensity into
anything that interested me and nothing
that didn't. Bill Gates lives in binary
states. This will pop up over and over
again. He is either totally apathetic or
completely obsessed. And one of his
first obsessions, like many of history's
greatest entrepreneurs, was reading. By
elementary school, I was reading a lot
on my own at home. I was learning how to
learn by myself, and I like the feeling
of being able to quickly absorb new
facts and entertain myself with books.
School felt slow in comparison. Reading
was my default state. When I read, hours
flew by. I tuned out the world. I was in
my own head. Books were the one thing my
parents never questioned spending money
on. One of our greatest treasures was a
set of the World Book Encyclopedia. I
read through every volume A to Z. Again,
I have to point this out. The maximum I
have for this is they devour entire
shelves. This idea of reading every
single book on a subject, reading entire
libraries reappears over and over again
in these biographies of great people
that did great things. Thomas Edison,
Winston Churchill, Elon Musk, Edwin Lan,
Bill Gates, they devour entire shelves.
If they are interested in a topic, they
must they can't even I think they're
compelled. They can't even help
themselves. They must read every single
thing they can they can get their hands
on about it. I had growing confidence in
my own power of my own intellect. With
this confidence also came a feeling that
the intellectual divide between adults
and me had collapsed. My father would
later say that this change happened
abruptly. He said, "I became an adult
overnight." an argumentative,
intellectually forceful, and sometimes
not very nice adult. I was nine. A lot
of people ask me for a top 10 list. I
was like, "Tell me, just give me the top
10 of all the books that you read, and
I'll just read the your top 10 list." I
don't know what that list would look
like. All I know is there's one book on
Bill Gates that has to be on that list.
One of my favorite books I' ever read is
called Hard Drive. Bill Gates in the
making of a Microsoft Empire. I've read
it twice. I've done two episodes on it.
And the reason that I'm and I'm going to
go through a bunch of highlights for you
in a little bit on the book. And one of
the the the reasons I find that book so
interesting is because it focuses on
Bill Gates ability to focus. And he
talks about this in source code. He
says, "I was very deliberate about what
I put energy into." I think that is a
huge difference between people that
accomplish great things and people that
want to but never do. You have to be
very deliberate about what you put your
energy into. I felt most at home in my
own head. I could go days without
speaking, emerging from my room only for
meals and school. This got to be such a
big problem. They had like a therapist,
like a family therapist. And it was
really the therapist was there to try to
moderate the relationship between Bill
and his mother. And the reason I bring
this up is because there's going to be
so many times throughout young Bill
Gates life where older adults realize
this kid is special. He's got an iron
will and it's just not going to work
out. Essentially what happens is the
therapist tells his parents you have to
loosen your grip on him. You are going
to break before he does. And later on in
the book when Bill Gates is already
running Microsoft for this is a
different book later on the podcast I'll
tell you about this. You know he he
talks about the fact that he's been
running Microsoft at that time for like
20 something years. He's like I don't
understand this is fantastic. Why is it
so rare for people to run a company they
founded for multiple decades? Goes back
to that legendary endurance and focus
that Larry Ellison observed him in. And
so this was the end result of family
therapy. My father later shared what Dr.
Cressy said. Give it up. He told my
parents, "He's going to win. Ease up.
Don't force it. Give your son more
freedom." And so any adult that came in
contact with young Bill Gates, I said
Bill had a lot of innate
self-confidence. He had a high opinion
of himself from a young age. That I
think this is one of the most important
things. I absolutely loved Michael
Dell's autobiography that I've told you
about a million times. You know, I've
listened to the audio book three times
before I made the episode on that book.
And one of my favorite things that
Michael Dell shared in the book was, you
know, the idea that I'm going to try to
take on the world's biggest company with
$1,000 from my dorm room. And he says,
"Was I a little full of myself at 19?"
Sure, I was. I think you have to be to
do anything important. Very similar to
the line in this book, Bill had a lot of
innate self-confidence. He had a high
opinion of himself from a young age. And
one of the smartest things that Bill did
from a young age is he started consuming
a ton just he said he consumed stacks of
biographies and he named some in the
book like Franklin Delanor Roosevelt,
Douglas MacArthur, Napoleon, Henry Ford,
etc. He said we spent him and his friend
were doing this together. He said we
spent hours on the phone dissecting
their lives. We analyze the path they
followed to success with intensity.
Again, he can't do anything. If he's
doing anything, he's doing it with
intensity. goes back to his love of
computers and really picking a business
that would come naturally to him, one he
could do for many, many decades. I loved
how the computer forced me to think. It
was completely unforgiving in the face
of mental sloppiness, again, which
really disturbs him. It demanded that I
be logically consistent and pay
attention to details. One misplaced
comma or semicolon and the thing
wouldn't work. This feedback loop was
addictive. He's like 13 at this point in
the story. The feeling of getting better
and better was a rush. Writing programs
flowed in from a combination of skills
that came easy to me. Logical thinking
being one and an ability to focus
intensely for long periods being
another. Programming also stoked the
persistent need I had to prove myself. I
was an eighth grader confident in my
brain power and convinced that my
intensity meant that I could do anything
the older guys could do, if not better.
The way he ends this paragraph speaks
back to his hyperco competitiveness. I
was determined to not let anyone get
anything on me. And so this is when he's
going to meet his future. He meets his
future co-founder Paul Allen at
Lakeside. Paul Allen's two years older
than him. And there's something that
Bill Gates says in a few different
books. He was attracted to to a a field
where there's like no path. There's like
no track in front of you. You kind of
have to figure this out for yourself.
And one way he would talk about this
later when he was asked to give advice,
you know, if we were starting over, if
you're a young person, what would you do
today? You obviously wouldn't start
Microsoft today. And he says, you should
look for virgin territory to identify
opportunity. And that is exactly what we
find where we are in the story because
he says there's no instruction. We knew
more than our teachers and we were
forced to try to piece together how to
write our first programs on our own.
Later on, I'll talk about, you know, we
couldn't watch YouTube tutorials on how
to code because there was no internet.
There was no internet. So he says as the
weeks been went by a lot of the kids who
first played around with the terminal
the computer lost interest and drifted
away leaving a small group of hardcore
adherence. That is Bill Gates favorite
word by far hardcore. And this is the
key. Everyone is human nature. They give
up on everything. Remember what Larry
Ellison said about Bill Gates. There are
very few people in the world that have
his focus and endurance
and I think he is 14 years old when he
gives into this obsession and it
actually gives him the way that he is
going to work for the rest of his life.
There's a great line in that book hard
drive I just told you about where it
says everything Bill did he did to the
max. And so there's an example of that
in source code because he's working all
day at the computer and they have access
to this computer lab at night called CC
cubed. But then he'd be home at like 10
o'clock at night and he's like why am I
going to go to sleep? Like I should just
be working on the computer. So he would
sneak out of his room at home, climb out
his bedroom window and go and catch the
bus, go into CC cube and work all night
on the computer. He says that would be
the first of many nights I sneaked out
and for years after. And this is really
important that he did this. This is one
of my favorite lines in the entire book.
He says, "A lot of successful people
I've met have described how after
falling in love with their chosen field,
they had to put in a period of hard
focused work. It's the time in which raw
interest is transformed into real
skill." That is so important. This
period, which was really just about four
months, meanted a work style for me that
would last for decades. Unconstrained by
cost or time, I'd fall into a zone of
total focus. As fast as I completed a
section of a program, I could ask the
computer to run it, giving me an instant
answer whether I was right or wrong. Try
something, see if it works. If it
doesn't, try again with something
different. We couldn't watch YouTube
tutorials on the internet. There was no
internet and guide books were rare. Him
and Paul Allen are so hungry for
knowledge, they would dive in dumpsters.
This is like the way to think about
this. How bad do you actually want it?
How bad do you actually want it? Because
there's somebody out there like a Bill
Gates or like a Michael Dell that wants
it deeply and are willing to do whatever
is necessary to get the information they
need that would help them accomplish
their goals. At the end of every day,
someone would take out the trash.
Included in that trash would be used
computer paper printed with lines of
code, whatever the CCubed engineers are
working on that day. at night when the
employees had all gone
had all gone home. Paul and I went out
went out to the back of the building to
see what we could find in the dumpster.
I was 13 years old learning on my own
terms with a $500,000
machine as my teacher. And when he says
he minted a working style, this is what
he means. I'd fall asleep at the
terminal more times than I can remember.
My nose meeting the keys for an hour or
two. Then I'd wake up and immediately
start coding again. So that is high
school, that is Harvard, that is
Microsoft. Everyone who runs into Bill
reports seeing him do this.
My approach was rapid fire in your face.
Bill loved conflict when building his
company. Another thing that he'll have
in common with a lot of history based
entrepreneurs, I could read, you know,
50 quotes to you about this, but I think
the best quote that describes this is
from Jeff Bezos, who also was like this.
If I have to choose between agreement
and conflict, I'll take conflict every
time. Why? Conflict always yields a
better result. Back to Bill Gates. I was
a kid working like a maniac late into
every night. I broke my record for
sustained work, once not leaving for
nearly 100 hours straight. That meant
not showering and hardly eating for
nearly four days. And so when you think
about why all these founders want
conflict, they want conflict because
they want to win. They want improvement.
They desperately need to be the best. So
I'm thinking Steve Jobs would talk about
the benefit of conflict. Jeff Bezos
talked about the benefit of conflict.
Bill Gates talks about it. And so in in
one case, Bill runs into he quickly
starts to become the best programmer out
of his like group of friends. But then
he runs into an older programmer with a
lot more experience. and you'll see his
reaction to this. Someone had gone
through and like a school teacher
corrected my work. The person had
completely torn it apart. He wasn't just
fixing issues, but the whole structure
and design of what I had written.
Normally, my first reaction would have
been to defend myself. If anyone at
Lakeside tried to critique my code, I
might snap, "No way. You're wrong." But
this time, as I sat reading his
comments, studying the code, I thought
to myself, "Oh, wow. This guy is so
right. I had never met anyone as
vigilant and sharp about computer
coding. He consistently returned my work
with corrections that raised it to
levels that I didn't know existed. That
is such an important line. He
consistently returned my work with
corrections that raised it to levels I
didn't know existed. Norton opened a
completely new level to me. And so this
idea that he wants you to push back. He
wants to be right. Akio Marita who I've
told you about a million times. He's the
founder of Sony. It's remarkable how
many of these people that that we admire
like a Bezos or Jobs or James Dyson
studied Akio Marita and and Sony. And
one of the most interesting ideas that
Akio Marita wrote about in his
autobiography which is a book called
Made in Japan was the fact that he
believed more companies should hire a
paid critic. And so when Akio discovered
this, at the time Sony was making audio
equipment. And so he found somebody that
had a very advanced ear, somebody that
loved Sony and wanted their products to
be as good as possible. And at the time,
he was just a a college student. And so
Aio gives him a job. And his job is,
hey, we're going to put this new product
out, and you're going to rip it to
shreds and tell us what and how it can
be better. That paid critic that starts
out as a college student eventually
becomes the president of Sony. What Aio
would tell you and what Bill Gates is
discovering that you should hire people
and you should use tools that make you
better. One of my partners makes such a
tool. Vanta is a very powerful tool to
get more sales. Vanta's value prop is
very clear. Vanta helps your company
prove that you're secure so more
customers will use your product or
service. Many companies won't sign
contracts unless you're certified. And
this is causing you to lose out on
sales. That is why the average Vanta
customer reports a 526% return on
investment after becoming a Vanta
customer. You can think of Vanta like an
intelligent security assistant that
helps your company pass audits without
tons of manual work. So, not only do you
make more money with Vanta, but you also
save more time. Manual compliance is
slow and painful, and doing everything
by hand takes months. The best companies
will not tolerate wasting valuable
company time doing something with labor
when technology can automate it. That is
a very old and powerful idea that you
and I see over and over and over again
in these biographies. Vanta will help
you win trust, close deals, and stay
secure, faster, and with less effort. Go
to vanta.com/founders,
and you'll get $1,000 off. That is
vanta.com/founders.
And so, when Bill Gates goes to Harvard,
he goes back to the exact same working
style. I drew myself into a daily rhythm
that worked for me, even if it seemed
extreme to my friends. Between studying
and programming, I could be awake for 36
hours at a stretch. Whenever exhaustion
took over, I would crash for 12 or more
hours fully clothed with my shoes still
on. I repeated this routine for months.
And so he him and Paul are talking about
what kind of business they want to
start. And the idea of making hardware
never appealed to Bill Gates. He says,
"I was increasingly cooling on the idea
of building hardware. The business of
manufacturing computers seemed too risky
to me. We'd have to buy parts, hire
people to assemble the machines, and
find lots of space to pull it off.
Software was different. No wires, no
factories. Writing software was just
brain power and time. Again, goes back
to his early childhood. What does he
like to do? He likes to be in a room by
himself, super focused for 36 straight
hours. And that is what we knew how to
do. What made us unique. It was where we
had an advantage. I believed we could
even lead the way. That idea, he wants
to pick a field where he can be the
absolute best. When he went to Harvard,
he thought, "Oh, maybe I'll study math."
And then he gets to Harvard and he
realizes, "Oh, there's a lot of people
that are better than me at math. So, I
need to find a different field to go
into. And so, the opportunity to start a
software company actually comes because
Paul Allen runs into Bill Gates dorm
room at Harvard. And in his hand, he's
holding the January 1975 issue of
Popular Electronics. And it says, "For 3
years, Paul and I had been talking about
how new computers that exploited the
exponential improvement of chips could
change everything." On the cover of that
magazine was the Altter, which was a
personal computer made by this company
out in Albuquerque, New Mexico called
MITs, MITS. So Paul and Bill decide to
cold call Ed Roberts, who's the
president of MITS, because Ed Roberts
needs somebody to write software for his
hardware. And so Bill says, "I explained
that we were almost finished writing a
version of BASIC, which is going to be
their first product for the Altter, and
we'd like to show it to them." Roberts
told me that he had already gotten calls
from people claiming to have the same
software. He said, "The first person who
could produce a working version would
get the deal." Two important parts of
this. One, Bill Gates said they didn't
have any software written. He says, "We
were all faking our way along."
And two, the reason I've been hounding
on this guy, the way that Bill works,
that he just focuses on the task until
it's done, that he's willing to work to
the edge of exhaustion and collapse in
his clothes with his face in the
keyboard and then jump back up and go
right back to work. This was important
many, many years after he developed that
habit because they that's exactly what
he's going to do to write the their
version of basic. They are going to get
there first.
And so Paul Allen's actually going to
move to Albuquerque, start working at
myths. Bill's going to go back and forth
to Harvard. But this is the most
important thing. This is the wave that
they are writing. This is why he
eventually is going to drop out because
he realized that there is a
technological phenomenon that is going
to leave them in the dust if they don't
take advantage of it right now. He says
computing had always been a scarce
protected resource, though no one could
fully grasp it at that time. that
scarcity was about to give way to plenty
and computers would very quickly be
available to millions of people and
there are all these hints that they're
on to something. Here's a hint that
you're on to something. The real diehard
fans drove hundreds and even thousands
of miles to Albuquerque to pick up their
altter. Coming to work in the morning,
it wasn't unusual to find RVs camped out
on the corner waiting for their altar
like it was takeout pizza. That office
in a strip mall surrounded by a check
cashing place, a laundry mat, and a
massage parlor was ground zero for what
would come to be called the personal
computer revolution. Ed Roberts had the
right idea, but he vastly underestimated
its popularity. He had forecast that
they might find 800 customers a year
willing to shell out the money for their
own computer. Instead, in the first few
months, they sold thousands. Again, I
have to repeat this because this just
pops up over and over again. It drives
me insane that so few people are willing
to study history and learn from human
nature. For an innovative product,
markets are often larger than you can
predict. For some reason, our species
has a hard time grasping that fact. For
a innovative product, markets are often
larger than you can predict. You see it
over and over again. I talked about last
week on the Dyson episode. He did it
with vacuum cleaners. Akio Marita did it
with the Sony Walkman. Steve Jobs did it
with the iPhone. For an innovative
product, markets are often larger than
you can predict. Here's another crazy
thing that just blows my mind. I sit
here and think about this again. I told
you this before, like I I don't like
when people speed through books or
podcasts or anything else. Sometimes it
could be a sentence or a paragraph and I
you just I just stare at it and you read
it over and over again and you just
stop. You don't go anywhere else and you
just think about what the hell is going
on, how important this one paragraph can
be. I'm about to read you one. It is so
odd that Bill, it goes back to, you
know, the ego and having a lot of
confidence that I mentioned that Michael
Dell said and that Bill Gates, you know,
everybody around him reported seeing him
when he was earlier. There's something
to this. The idea that Bill even thought
that you could start a pure software
company. These are the conditions. This
is the culture at the time in which Bill
had this very unusual idea. It was
generally accepted that software should
be free. Software was something to be
copied from a friend, openly shared or
even stolen. It had always be been free.
Why shouldn't you give it away? But Paul
and I wanted to build a business. Our
conviction arrived at over many late
night talks was that as personal
computers got cheaper and cheaper and
spread into businesses and homes, there
would be a nearly unlimited
corresponding demand for high quality
software. That is the end of the
paragraph. How much software in the
world on an annual basis is sold now? Do
you know how [__] crazy this is? That
paragraph is crazy. There is no such
thing as a pure software company. Your
customers don't even believe that your
product should be paid for. Almost
nobody has a personal computer. But Bill
Gates has belief. He has conviction.
That is why it's dangerous to rush
through things and to skip over things.
I reread that paragraph probably 15
times before I just read it to you. It
is one of the craziest things to
understand in this story. And then I
told you I've read, I don't know, five
other books on Bill Gates. I've never
heard him describe it this way. We
wanted to make a software factory. We
would provide a broad range of products
that would be regarded as the best in
the business. And if things went really
well, I thought that maybe we could have
a big team of skilled programmers
working for us. Microsoft was going to
be a software factory. We're going to
have many, many products from the jump.
We wanted to get our software on every
personal computer in the world. Software
companies didn't exist. Again, this is
insane. Our product was something
customers thought should be free, but we
had one customer and faith that we could
build from there. That one customer is
this tiny little company in Albuquerque
and New Mexico in a strip mall
surrounded by a check a check cashing
place and a massage parlor. That is the
humble beginnings of what will be one of
the most successful companies ever
created.
Now he is a young, inexperienced
entrepreneur and he makes a bad deal. He
winds up saving his ass later on, but
the deal that they signed with MITs gave
them the exclusive rights to sublic
software to any other company that
wanted to use the 8080 basic in their
products would have to get the source
code, which he describes as the recipe
to basic through MITs and not Microsoft.
This is a bad deal. They're going to
wind up in a lawsuit over it. It almost
kills Microsoft in the cradle, too. Now,
I want to go back to this reoccurring
theme that Bill Gates wanted to be
hardcore. He he wants to be a hardcore
person. This is the way he he's going to
work. He talks about himself out of
everybody out of his co-founders, out of
all the people working at Microsoft. He
was the taskmaster. He was also the one
that was so concerned and scared. I was
always worried that we weren't moving
fast enough or working hard enough. As I
started this journey into turning our
ideas about software into a viable
business, I found a role model in
Digital Equipment Corporation's founder
Ken Olsen. He learned as he went and
over time became a master of his
business. I reason that he and by
extension I could pick up whatever
skills and knowledge were needed. So he
holds up Ken Olsson as a as a role
model. He's holding up Ed Roberts.
They're they're embedded inside of MITs
and he's like, "Oh, this is we're
learning a ton because this is a really
poorly run company." Mitts was at the
center of a booming new industry. And
yet it was a frenzy of confusing
initiatives, halfbaked strategies,
constantly shifting plans, and
ultimately sometimes angry customers.
Even some of the most senior people laid
the blame on their boss. Ed Roberts and
they were frank about why everyone was
scared to raise their concerns. It's
implied but not explicitly stated. Ed
Roberts is no Bill Gates. And the
problem is he built a company culture
which is the opposite of what most great
founders want. They want you to fight
back. They will not respect you if you
are a sickopant.
Everybody was scared of Ed Roberts. So
therefore what happens? No one tells you
the truth. Everyone except Bill Gates.
Ed found Bill Gates very confusing
because everybody else is kissing his
ass. And you have this young kid that's
like getting in his face and yelling at
him. He appeared beused by my whole
affect, the energy and the intensity. My
need to hash it out now personality. I
had excited always on intensity. And he
says I was hardcore from day one.
Anytime I wasn't sleeping, I was coding
or writing a letter to drum up business.
My mind was locked on the next step.
People to hire, deals to cut, and new
customers to find. And then we already
mentioned this earlier, Bill tracked
every penny and he goes and rips his
co-founders and the early employees when
they failed to do the same. So he writes
his business plan on seven pages. He
says, "My guiding principle is not
getting ahead of ourselves and drowning
in costs." That's the first sentence.
Our two main goals I wrote were number
one, grow in size and reputation, and
two, make money. That letter marked the
next phase of a concerted effort to
establish ourselves as an independent
company. What does he mean by
independent company? He has one
customer. They're working very close
with them. He and it's a crappy run and
it's a crappy run company. We've got to
diversify away from this guy as soon as
we can. Another smart thing Bill did. It
worried me that we were still so reliant
on MITs and they start having these
fights since MITs held worldwide rights
to 8080 basic. Anytime we found a
customer for the source code, the
contract would have to go through MITs.
If we signed a deal, then we had to
split the revenues with them. Bill is
going to fight back. he's going to get
himself out of this deal. Another thing
that was important to him, he wanted to
be around other high energy, intense
people. By then, I could instantly
recognize other people who admitted my
kind of excess energy. Steve Balmer had
it beyond anyone that I had ever known.
So, he wants to be around high energy,
intense people. Again, another way he
works. He pays attention to everything.
The focus was Microsoft and all the
things that were falling through the
cracks. Travel expenses, employee
oversight, customer follow-up, and
contract negotiations. I groused that
they still hadn't lined up a company
credit card today. That would be a
no-brainer. They just go to ramp.com.
Then it goes back to this letter he's
writing them. I wrote, "We spent $14,000
since I left and not thinking about cash
flow or taking care of the memory
royalty is a way to send us down the
tube. For all the talk about hard work
and long hours, it's clear that you guys
haven't talked about Microsoft together
or even thought about it individually,
at least not nearly enough. As far as
putting out our last measure, the
commitment just isn't being met." And
when he's commenting on this letter and
these talks he's having with the people
he's working with, this is what he says.
I've always been the taskmaster, the one
who incessantly worried about losing our
lead and fearing that if we weren't
careful, we'd be sunk. We watched CC
cubed. Remember when they were he was
sneaking out night, taking a bus, and
working on the computer? That was a
startup he was working at. It was Cubed.
says, "We watched CCube go from a
promising startup to having creditors
drag the furniture away 18 months later
and we were witnessing the growing
trouble at MITs, which had the lead but
seemed to lack the management rigor to
maintain it. This is it is very
interesting to me how much of the book
is talking about how worried he was.
Steve Jobs said that victory in our
industry is spelled survival. It's very
clear from his actions that Bill Gate
agreed. We knew the core job of
developing software. I worried. There's
that word again. I worried we weren't
learning everything else fast enough.
He's always worried. And so there's this
company that comes in called Pertek.
Pertch is going to buy MITs for $6
million. And at the time it looked like
one of the worst things happen to
Microsoft. Winds up being the best
because what happens is after they buy
everything Microsoft related stopped
completely. So Pertex stops paying
Microsoft royalty payments. The
licensing deal stopped. They refused to
sell RBasic to any other company. They
were making no efforts to sell our
software and they were blocking deals
even as more and more companies were
soliciting us. This is going to cause
the lawsuit. Now, there's another
sentence in that book hard drive that I
told you about earlier that is one of my
favorite descriptions of a young Bill
Gates and it talks about this lawsuit
because you know Ed Roberts sold his
company to Pertch, but he had warned
them about Bill Gates is not this
average dude. He's not this some little
21-year-old punk. Roberts had warned
Perk that it would have its hands full
with gates, but no one listened to him.
Pert kept telling me I was being
unreasonable and they could deal with
this guy. Roberts said, "It's a little
like Roosevelt telling Churchill that he
could deal with Stalin." And so this
idea that I've already repeated a few
times that he just pays attention to
like every little detail. He was the one
that had negotiated the contract with
them to begin with. And so he says, "It
became increasingly clear to me that
perk had no intention of paying us back
royalties or sublicensing the 88 basic
to any other companies. Yet now I
wondered if they had even read our
contract. We didn't transfer ownership
of the software to MITs. We licensed it
to them and they were obligated by the
contract to make its best efforts to
sublic the software to other companies.
This is really really important. When a
company agrees to make its best efforts,
it agrees to do everything in its power
to make good on whatever is stipulated
in contract. I said we agreed to the
exclusive license. If MITs agreed to
make best efforts to license our source
code, their lawyers push back saying
that nobody agreed to best efforts. They
would consider instead the term
reasonable efforts, but I wouldn't
agree. So he wouldn't sign the contract
unless the best efforts was in the
contract. This is again years before
they're fighting in a lawsuit. That was
so important. Best efforts it was. That
decision is going to save Bill Gates ass
later. And so he says, "Our central
challenge was to convince the arbitrator
that number one, many companies wanted
to license our product. Number two,
Pertekch admits was blocking those
licenses when they were contractually
obligated to make their best efforts at
facilitating them. They almost ran out
of money." This is again why Bill Gates
is so he was so focused on this. He
wanted a one-year buffer. He says,
"We're going to have enough money in our
bank account that if no one pays us for
a year, we are going to survive." And so
the arbitrator sides with Microsoft. He
terminated our exclusive license with
MITs. clarifying definitively that we
owned our source code. We immediately
called all the companies that have been
waiting for the software. Within weeks,
we had money coming in from five or six
clients. And then it goes back to the
importance of having this hardcore
focus. Like one of those watertight
hatches on a submarine, I could shut out
the rest of the world. Driven by the
sense of responsibility I felt for
Microsoft, I had closed the hatch door
and locked the wheel. No girlfriend, no
hobbies. It was the one way I knew to
stay ahead. and I expected similar
dedication from others. We had this huge
opportunity in front of us. Why wouldn't
you work 80 hours a week in pursuit of
it? Yes, it was exhausting, but it was
also exhilarating.
I needed a 24-hour a day business
partner. He's realizing that Paul's not
he's not going to be his long-term
partner. A peer who would hash out and
argue through big decisions with me.
someone who would pour over scribbled
lists of which customers might or might
not pay and discuss what our bank
account would look like as a result.
Steve Balmer joined in 1980 and became
the 24-hour a day partner I needed. And
so the book source code ends when they
relocate from Albuquerque to Washington.
And so he is driving back. And I think
this is one of the most important things
that again reappears over and over again
in these biographies, in these
autobiographies. When you have extreme
success like Bill Gates has had, there's
no way that they could have possibly
predicted the scale of their success. He
has no idea what is ahead of him. It
wasn't just me moving back. It was
Microsoft, the company that a friend and
I had co-created with that MLY group of
employees and a growing profitable
business and which from that point on
would be an integral part of who I was.
My path was set. I could hardly imagine
how far it would take me. So, Bill is
going to write two more autobiographies.
The second one is going to be focused on
building Microsoft. Obviously, when that
comes out, I will read and make an
episode on immediately. And the third
one will be on his philanthropy and his
foundation. So, what I'm going to do now
is just pull out a couple other ideas
and highlights from four other books
that I read on Bill Gates. And the first
book is Hard Drive, Bill Gates and
Making the Microsoft Empire. Still my
favorite book that I've ever read on
Bill Gates. The storytelling in that
book is absolutely phenomenal and it's
because of the phenomenal storytelling
that the ideas are implanted in your
brain and you remember them. This is a
very important theme that recurs over
and over again. The fact that people buy
stories Steve Jobs said that
storytellers the most powerful person in
the world. Don Valentine, founder of
Sequoa says the art of storytelling is
critically important. Most of the
entrepreneurs who come to talk to us
cannot tell a story. Learning to tell a
story is incredibly important because
that's how the money works. The money
flows as a function of the stories. And
that is exactly what my new partner,
Collateral, does. Collateral transforms
your complex ideas into compelling
narratives. I need you to remember their
website, which is easy to remember
because it's collateral.com. And what
Collateral does is they craft
institutional-grade marketing
collateral. And they do this for private
equity, private credit, real estate,
venture capital, family offices, hedge
funds, oil and gas companies, all kinds
of different businesses. I have friends
that have used collateral for their
marketing collateral that have raised
billions of dollars of capital and have
made hundreds of millions of dollars.
Why? Because storytelling is one of the
highest forms of leverage and you should
invest heavily in it. And you can do
that by going to collateral.com.
And so the first highlight from hard
drive that I'm going to talk to about is
the fact that by 1990 remember they're
they're having these starting Microsoft
late7s 767 they're like you know we want
to make a pure software company but all
our customers think it should be given
away for free. There's no such thing at
the time. Well, by 1990, Microsoft had
become the first software company in
history to sell more than a billion
dollars worth of software in a single
year. There's a great quote from Bill
Gates and hard drive. He says, "I can do
anything I put my mind to. Bill was 11
when he said this. Everything Bill did,
he did to the max. What he did always
went well, well beyond everyone else.
Everything he did, he did competitively
and not simply to relax. He was a very
driven individual. The computer
triggered a deep passion and an
obsession in him. He devoured everything
he could get his hands on concerning
computers and how to communicate with
them. Often teaching himself as he went.
It was often after midnight when he
finished his work. It was when we got
free time that we really got into
computers, Bill said. I mean, then I
became hardcore. It was day and night.
So, keep in mind when he's saying that,
he's describing a point of his life when
he was 13 years old. And again, he's
using that his favorite word, hardcore.
This is the way that his friends in high
school and college would describe him.
He was sure of himself. He was
aggressively intimidatingly smart. He
didn't have any social graces. He was
one of those guys who knew he was
smarter than everyone else. And he knew
he was right all the time. He was
hard-nosed, confrontational. His
intensity would boil over into raw,
unthrottled emotion. He had a sense of
adventure. He was a risktaker, a guy who
liked to have fun and who was fun to be
with. He had an immense range of
knowledge and interest and could talk at
length on any number of subjects. He
also knew that he wanted to be rich.
Although Bill did not know what he was
going to do with his life after high
school, he seemed confident that
whatever he would do would make him a
lot of money. He had made such a
prediction about his future on several
occasions. I'm going to make my first
million dollars by the time I'm 25. It
was not said as a boast or even a
prediction. He talked about the future
as if his success was predestined, as if
it was a given, as certain as the
mathematical proof that 1 + 1 equals 2.
Bill Gates would later tell a friend
that he went to Harvard to learn from
people smarter than he was and left
disappointed.
One of the books that I have a bunch of
highlights about Bill that I want to
share with you is actually Paul Allen's
autobiography, but it's really
interesting. Paul Allen and his mom are
in this book hard drive. And Paul
Allen's mom would warn her son about
Bill Gates. He said that he was an edge
walker. This is an example of that.
Gates would fall asleep in class was not
surprising. He was living on the edge.
It was not unusual for him to go as long
as 3 days without sleep. His habit was
to do 36 hours or more at a stretch,
collapse for 10 hours, go get a pizza,
and then get back at it. And if that
meant that he was starting at 3:00 in
the morning, then so be it. Bill had a
monoomaniacal quality. He would focus on
something and really stick with it. He
had a determination to master whatever
it was he was doing. Bill was deciding
where he was going to put his energy
into hell with what anyone else thought.
And what's interesting is how much Bill
needed Paul Allen to push him over the
edge. I don't think Bill Gates would
have dropped out of Harvard without Paul
Allen. And Paul Allen was a lot he had
like a more broader interest than Bill.
Bill just wanted to make software and
sell software and do that forever. And
so I thought it was really funny is that
Paul Allen actually quotes Shakespeare
to convince Bill that now is the time to
start their own company and that it has
to be right now or we're going to miss
it. And this is the quote from
Shakespeare that Paul Allen read to Bill
Gates. There is a tide in the affairs of
men which taken at the flood leads onto
fortune. omitted all the voyage of their
life is bound in shallows and in
miseries. On such a full sea are we now
afloat and we must take the current when
it serves or lose our venture. Gates
knew Allan was right and that the
personal computer miracle was going to
happen and it was going to happen with
or without them. Now I already mentioned
this a few times but I think it again
really important to reiterate. Not a lot
of people know that how cautious Bill
Gates was with Microsoft's money. He
wanted a one-year buffer. He didn't need
to raise venture capital. Microsoft was
a money printing machine then and now.
He was financially conservative and that
was the way he intended to run his
company. There would be no unnecessary
overhead or extravagant spending habits
at Microsoft. And he had giant goals
from day one. Bill always had the vision
from the time that I met him that
Microsoft's mission in life was to
provide all the software for micro
computers. And it goes back to his
preference to keep it lean. You just
need a small group of ridiculously smart
people. The way that it would describe
the early employees at Microsoft, they
called them micro kids. Part of what
made Microsoft so successful during the
company's infancy was the team of
programmers that Gates and Allen began
to assemble in the spring of 1976. They
became known as the Microkids. They were
high IQ insomniacs who wanted to join
the personal computer crusade. Kids with
a passion for computers who would drive
themselves to the limits of their
ability and endurance. This was one of
the most surprising things when I read
this book for the first time, just how
lean Microsoft was. Four years in and
they had just 11 employees. I think they
might have had 12 because they they take
that picture, that famous Microsoft
picture when they're moving from
Albuquerque to Seattle and there's only
11 people in the photo, but I'm pretty
sure there was one guy that missed the
the photo session. But in any case, four
years in, they either have 11 or 12
employees and this is Bill Gates at 24.
It had only been a year and a half since
they had moved from Albuquerque to
Seattle. Now, Microsoft, a company with
$7 million in annual sales, had fewer
than 40 employees, and it was about to
go into business with IBM, an
international giant with revenues
approaching $30 billion a year. Bill
prioritized sales over everything. What
sustained the company was not Bill's
ability to write programs. Bill
sustained Microsoft through tireless
salesmanship. For several years, he
alone made the cold calls and haggled,
cajjolled, browbeat, and heranged the
hardware makers, convincing them to buy
Microsoft services and products. He was
the best kind of salesman there is. He
knew the product and he believed in it.
He approached every client with the
zealatry of a true believer. He was also
hellbent on moving fast. And one way,
one tactic he used to move fast is you
have to prioritize personal performance
over management. Here's an example of
that. Gates came into Smith's office one
day and shouted at him, "How can you
possibly take this much time working on
this contract? Just get it done." Smith
recalled of this short but educational
meeting with his much younger boss. I
think what I realized was that I needed
to focus that the money and the
opportunities were simply there and I
needed to close contracts with
customers. So, I focused on personal
performance over management. Initially,
I was dealing more with management
issues as a guy with an academic
background coming out of a large
company. But it took me a couple of
meetings to realize that personal
performance was what mattered. This is
another mind-blowing stat. When we got
this is this is Bill Gates describing
what Microsoft looked like when they had
just 30 employees. When we got up to 30
employees, it was still just me, a
secretary, and 28 programmers. I wrote
all the checks, answered the mail, took
the phone calls.
Another great idea. Bill overcame his
weakness that he looked young by relying
on his strength which was his mind and
the passion that he had for his work.
And so one of their early customers
describes coming to the office one day.
He says, "When someone came out to take
us back to his office, I thought the guy
who came out was the office boy. It was
Bill." Well, I'll tell you, by the time
you were with Bill for 15 minutes, you
no longer thought about how old he was
or what he looked like. He had the most
brilliant mind that I ever dealt with.
And he was absolutely ruthless. Bill
believed that if you lost a $50,000
contract, he considered it a $100,000
loss because Microsoft lost the 50 and
his competitor gained the 50. Gates
wanted to eliminate his opponents from
the playing field. Bill learned early on
that killing the competition is the name
of the game. There just aren't as many
people later to take you on. In game
theory, you improve the probability
you're going to win if you have fewer
competitors.
And Bill would relentlessly study his
competitors. If you talk to Bill about
any software company or any hardware
company, there's a very high probability
that he'll be able to tell you who the
CEO is, what their revenues were last
year, what they're currently working on,
and what the problems are with their
products. He is very, very
knowledgeable, and he prides himself on
knowing what's going on in his industry.
This combination of ambition and wanting
to win every single day is what Bill
Gates referred to as being hardcore.
And so I mentioned earlier that
Microsoft did not need VC. In a
carefully planned move that had been
under discussion for some time, Bill
sold 5% of Microsoft for a million
dollars. Can you imagine? 5% a million
of Microsoft for a million dollars to
TVI, which is technology venture
investors. Microsoft did not need the
venture capital. Gates was essentially
hiring the firm's expertise. There's a
great line that I'll share with you
later from this interview from 1997 that
Bill talks about that the money they
raised from the IPO that they never
touched. to just put it in the bank and
it's still sitting there with the other
$5 billion that Microsoft has. So, he
really prided himself on just making not
only just a phenomenally financially
efficient company and one that just
absolutely printed cash. And I
absolutely loved what he said about this
because he knew that Microsoft had to go
public, but he didn't want to. And a
year before they go public, he said,
"All I'm thinking and dreaming about is
selling software, not stock." And so,
that leads us to the third book that I
want to talk about, which is actually
the sequel from Hard Drive. It's called
Overdrive. It's not a a great book. It's
I mean it's not bad. I guess maybe want
to read it once. Honestly, I don't even
know. Maybe not read it once. Maybe just
reread Hard Drive a second time is
probably a better use of your time. But
there are just a handful of ideas in
here that I do think like I want to pull
out and I think is interesting because
now we've fast forwarded in Microsoft's
history and we see that this focus and
intensity is still there. Neither
marriage nor fame nor fortune had
diminished the white hot competitive
fire that consumed him.
And so one of my favorite parts of this
book is just again it goes into this
ruthless competitive drive that Bill
Gates had. This is how a competitor
described Bill. This guy name is Philipe
Khan. Phipe would later say Gates looks
at everything as something that should
be his. It can be an idea, market share,
or a contract. There is not an ounce of
conscientiousness or compassion in him.
The notion of fairness means nothing to
him. The only thing he understands is
leverage. And again, the reason I bring
that up, obviously your competitors are
probably not going to say nice things
about you, but but the important thing
is Bill liked to fight and you can
actually learn a lot about his
personality because he he would he was
giving interviews back then and he's in
the middle of the fight and so he would
describe what he called his disgruntled
competitors. This is from an interview
that Bill gave to a major publication.
Lotus lost ground because it was very
late in catching the two biggest
technology waves, the Macintosh and
Windows. Borland International is too
distracted with its bad merger. Philippe
Khan is good at playing the saxophone
and sailing, but he's not good at making
money. Word Perfect is truly a one
product company. Our most successful
software is for the Macintosh. We have a
much higher market share on the Mac than
anywhere else. And how does Apple help
us? Will they sue us in court? In the
future, maybe our competitors will
decide to become more competent.
Deep competitive fires drove Bill Gates
goes back to this insane level of focus.
For many years, Gates had refused to
even own a TV, preferring instead to
spend his time reading books and
magazines. There's a great story told by
Michael Morates where he's interviewing
Bill Gates and he he tells the story.
He's like, "Oh my god, somebody broke
into your car and and stole your your
radio." And Bill's like, "No, they
didn't. I took that out myself." And
Bill says something like, you know, from
my house to the office is a 7-minute
drive. From the office to the airport,
it's like an 11-minute drive. And then
he does his math of like how much is in
the car between the office and his house
and the airport. He's like, you know,
that's an extra 5 hours a month where
instead of listening to music, I can
just be thinking about Microsoft.
Another interesting, I would say, smart
idea that that Bill had, he would keep a
list of mistakes and it was a top 10
list and he'd reread that to make sure
they don't make the same mistakes in the
future. Now, I have not read Overdrive
in probably I don't know four years, I
would guess. But even though it's been
that long, this is the one story in the
book that I have never forgotten. It's
one of the craziest stories I've ever
heard. For for years, Bill Gates had
Philipe Khan in his sights. In the mid1
1980s, when Borland's Turbo Pascal, this
is Khan's company, was blowing away
Microsoft's competing product. Gates
held meetings that became known around
Microsoft as the Borland War councils
during which him and his staff plotted
how to beat the Frenchman being Philipe
Khan. Gates reportedly walked into one
such meeting and threw Khan's picture
down on a table and said, "How can I get
rid of this guy?" They would pass out
t-shirts that read, "Delete Phipe." But
this is by far the craziest story in the
book. Phipe Khan recalled that he had
once found Bill Gates at an industry
conference in the late 1980s sitting
alone in a corner looking at a
photograph in his hands. Phipe walks up
to Bill Gates and Phipe says it was a
picture of me. It's one of my favorite
Bill Gates story because it's just such
a hardcore crazy thing to do. Bill Gates
burning desire to win and fear of
failure compel him not only to beat his
competitors but to destroy them. Okay,
so that leads us to Paul Allen's
autobiography that he wrote shortly
before he died. It's called Idea Man. As
you can imagine, there's a bunch of
interesting stories and anecdotes about
Bill Gates in it. I mentioned this
earlier, the fact that Bill lived in
binary states. He was either bursting
with nervous energy, drinking a dozen
Diet Cokes a day, or he was completely
dead to the world. He'd work until
drained and then curl up on the floor in
his office and be asleep within 15
seconds. Sometimes I'd return in the
morning and see Bill's feet sticking out
of his office doorway. Bill and Paul
were very different. And I think there's
a story in Michael Dell's autobiography
that's similar to the story that's told
in Paul Allen's autobiography in the
sense that Michael had an older, more
experienced person that he hired to be
president of Dell. And the guy only
lasted four years. He said by the time,
and this is in the very early history of
Dell, by the time you know, four years
was up, his like back hurt. He had
stomach problems. He was losing all his
hair. He was just like dying. And he's
like, I'm this dist the stress is
literally killing me. And Michael's like
bouncing to the office every day. He's
like super excited. It's exactly the
same with Bill Gates and Paul Allen.
Obviously, Bill playing the role of Dell
and Paul Allen playing the role. I think
the guy's name was Lee Walker, but he he
talks a lot about this. Microsoft was a
high stress environment because Bill
drove others as hard as he drove
himself. He was growing into a
taskmaster who would prowl the parking
lot on weekends and see who made it in.
In addition to rereading the source code
and then all my highlights and
everything from these other five books,
I also watched a documentary on Bill
that I mentioned earlier. It's on
Netflix. And Bill had would go out and
he'd memorize the license plates of the
cars in the Microsoft parking lot in the
early days. That's what he's talking
about. And one thing that Bill would do
is he never thought it was good enough.
You should always be pushing. you should
always be pushing. So it says Bob
Greenberg once put in 81 hours in 4 days
Monday through Thursday. When Bill
touched base towards the end of Bob's
marathon, he asked him, "What are you
working on tomorrow?" Bob said, "I was
planning to take the day off." And Bill
said, "Why would you do that?" He
genuinely couldn't understand it. He
never seemed need to recharge. Bill
liked to hash things out in intense
one-on-one discussions. He thrived on
conflict and he wasn't shy about
instigating it. A few of us cringed at
the way he would demean people and force
them to defend their positions. If what
he heard displeased him, he'd shake his
head and say sarcastically, "Oh, I
suppose that means we'll lose the
contract." And then what? And if you
hadn't thought through your position or
Bill was just in a lousy mood, he'd
resort to his classic put down. That is
the stupidest [__] thing I've ever
heard. Bill came on like a force of
nature. Bill liked it when someone
pushed back and drilled down with him to
get to the best solution. He wouldn't
pull rank to end an argument. He wanted
you to overcome his skepticism and he
respected those who did.
And then I love this comparison of Bill
Gates from Paul Allen. I've seen just
one other person up close who compared
to him, who wanted not only to beat you,
but to crush you if he could. Those two
stood apart for raw competitiveness.
That was Bill Gates and Michael Jordan.
And then it goes back to this just
relentless focus. He knew bits and
pieces of popular culture, but he was
thinking about the software business
first, second, and third. And then I'm
so glad I reread my highlights from this
book because I had forgotten this. So
Ross Perau tried to buy Microsoft in
for quote mid7 figures.
And this is what Bill Gates said. Bill
Gates said, "No, I want to remain
independent." Now, keep in mind
Microsoft's revenue that year was just
$2.4 million.
When I reread that, I thought about this
conversation I had with this founder.
So, a lot of people asked me like they
think because I've done all this reading
like I have some kind of like predictive
ability, which I don't believe I have.
Like, what are what are like the young
founders now that that you know are
going to be one of the greats? And I
don't believe I have any kind of
predictability. You know, time will
tell. But there is one person that I've
gotten to know that just gives me young
Bill Gates vibes and it's the founder of
Cognition. His name is Scott Woo. And
many people in the tech industry will
know who Scott is. Many people out out
of it will not. And if you're one of the
people that don't, I would definitely
look into him and just pay attention to
his career. He's still young. He's still
in his 20s and he's running one of the
most important AI companies today. And
so I absolutely love that little piece
of, you know, Microsoft trivia. It's
like, nope, we're not selling the
company for, you know, a couple million
dollars. So then Paul goes into Bill's
thinking on their most important deal in
the early days, Microsoft, which
obviously there's a deal with IBM that's
been covered over and over again. So I
don't want to rehash that. I just do
want to tell you how they think how they
thought about it and Bill's really great
decisions that he was uh making uh
around this time. Says, "Bill and I were
willing to forego per copy royalties if
we could freely license the DOSs
software to other manufacturers. This
was our old strategy for the Altter
Basic. Already inshed in antitrust
litigation. IBM readily bought this
non-exclusive arrangement. They'd later
be slammed for giving away the store,
but few people at the time discerned how
quickly the industry was changing, and
no one, including us, foresaw that the
IBM deal would ultimately make Microsoft
the largest tech company of its day or
that Bill and I would become wealthy
beyond our imagining. Paul continues,
"Microsoft's biggest asset wasn't the
version that we' made specifically for
IBM PCs. The real Bonanza was the
compatible system that we called MS
DOSS. The product that could be sold
over and over again worldwide under our
own name to companies that would follow
IBM's flying wedge into the 16bit
market. It is a product that they bought
from this company called Seattle
Computer Products. So, Microsoft is
going back and forth with Seattle
Computer Products on this. And this part
is really interesting because they're
willing to license to customers, but
they want to buy from suppliers. We
proposed an outright purchase which they
say no to when customers ask to outright
purchase their software and that was a
sales agreement that we signed with
Seattle Computer Products. That contract
laid the foundation for what Microsoft
would become. It was a free and clear
DOSs, a very valuable asset. And as I
stated in a deposition sometime later,
Bill was very adamant, this is the most
important part. This is why I just read
this these this entire section to you.
This is the part that you should
remember. Bill was very adamant that we
should make the contract an agreement of
sale. Bill thought we should have
complete ownership and control of the
product. He felt it was always better if
he wanted to control and benefit from
the evolution of a product to own it as
compared to license it.
Paul then gives us insight into how Bill
hired. Bill thought it was better to get
programmers when they were young and
enthusiastic before they were ruined by
working somewhere else. We wanted
freshly minted bachelor degrees. Above
all, we were after the brightest lights.
A great programmer can outproduce an
average one by 10:1. With a genius, the
ratio might be 50 to1. And then Paul
talks about the different way that he
saw Microsoft compared to Bill. Bill saw
Microsoft as a part of himself. Paul had
other interests. Bill so utterly
identified with Microsoft that he'd get
confused about where the company let off
and he began. By the late 1990s,
Microsoft was the largest and most
profitable software company in history,
growing at the same rate as the personal
computer industry. Very rapid growth.
Yet, Bill saw the glass as 7/8s empty.
Again, another thing that Bill shares
with almost all of history's greatest
entrepreneurs. No resting on laurels, no
sleeping on wins. Make something great
and then do it again. They are never
ever satisfied. And they all also do the
following. Bill was rigorous about
weeding out underperformers.
Okay. So then the last book that I want
to talk to you about is a book that I've
told you over and over again that
everybody should buy. It's incredible. I
think it's episode 208 of Founders.
Might be episode 204. It's called In the
Company of Giants. Two Stanford MBA
students wrote it back in 97.
They interview 16 technology company
founders and the book is just the
transcripts of the interviews edited.
It's incredible. So all the words you're
about to hear are just Bill Gates in 97.
And at this point, Bill has 20,000
employees and a net worth of around $20
billion. He says, "Everyone else was
doing hardware and software. We focused
just on software. That was our
advantage. The insight to do a dedicated
software company was key because other
companies like Wang or DEEC or IBM who
had lots of software expertise didn't
have that vision. They didn't treat
their software skill as a key business.
And then he talks about one of the main
benefits he had and that led to a lot of
early success with sales. There's this
idea that you should you you have to
know what you compete with, not just
who. So, let me give you a little
background here. the the the that
maximum came from this guy named Herb
Keller who was the founder of Southwest
Airlines. Southwest Airlines was the
most successful airline in history. It
was profitable for 40 straight years and
it was originally started as just to be
a airline that was only going to operate
in the state of Texas. And so Herb
Keller tells this great story in one of
the books I read on him where, you know,
he'd have one of his investors come up
to him like, "Hey, you know, you should
raise your prices. Like your competitor
is selling a flight from, let's say,
Austin to to Houston for $80. We're
charging 16. Certainly, we can bump up
the price a little bit. And Herb was
adamant. He's like, "No, you don't
understand. You think I'm competing with
XYZ Airline. I'm not competing with
them. My real competitor is ground
transportation. You think you know who
we're competing with, and I'm telling
you what we're competing with." And so,
Bill Gates talks about this. In the
early days, our sales approach was to
say, "If you had to write the software
in-house, your fixed engineering budget
would be X amount of dollars. And
Microsoft's price is less than half of X
dollars. We competed against in-house
engineering budgets and what you got
from us was more powerful than they if
they than if they had done it
themselves.
And then he goes back into that key
insight that he made you know 20 years
previously. Software is a very unusual
business. The development work is not
that capital intensive. The first year
we generated cash like mad. Even though
we had many customers who went bankrupt.
In other words, we had a wide margin for
error. I always wanted to have enough
money in the bank so that if nobody paid
us for a year, we would be okay. And he
was still like that. He says, "The money
we got from going public is in the bank.
That along with another $5 billion."
And then I mentioned this already once,
but I think it's important to repeat. I
used to have this memo that I updated
every year called the 10 great mistakes
of Microsoft. Many of our mistakes
relate to the markets we didn't get into
as early as we should have. But the
constraint was always the number of
people we could hire, how to manage
everything, and then ensuring everything
that we made met all of our delivery
commitments. We were always on edge. I
think that's something I I should have
told you multiple times. It's in all
these books. You're Bill Gates would if
you actually read between the lines of
what he's saying, you know, we're always
on edge. As your company scales,
everything's going to feel like it's
broken. Everything feels like it's going
to be late. everything is going to feel
like it's not good enough. He's 20 years
in 21 years I think into his company, he
still feels that way. He reiterates this
idea that hey, everything's going to be
slightly uncomfortable a little later on
in the interview. It was a real
challenge because the demand for our
capabilities exceeded what we could do.
Everything Bill sees the glass is always
7/8 empty. Bill says, "We never talk
about the things we've been successful
at. We always talk about the challenges
ahead. There is no finish line. You will
never go into a Microsoft meeting and
hear somebody say we won and that sense
of urgency that no resting on laurels
something he talks about again large
companies are never easy to maintain at
a high level of excellence it becomes
the daily task there is a hu this is
remarkable because I mentioned you know
even with 20,000 employees and a $20
billion net worth at this point Bill
knew that it was just the beginning
listen to what he says here this is 1997
there is a huge business out there in
terms of getting to the market potential
It's all in front of us. We're a
software company and we think software
will continue to be valuable. There's an
opportunity to make about $55 billion
out there.
And even that, Bill Gates couldn't have
predicted what Microsoft's going to be
doing, you know, 20 30 years later. Last
year's revenue was something like $280
billion. So he says there's an
opportunity to make about $55 billion
out there. Great software will become
more valuable. You must keep the main
thing the main thing. sells software,
not stock. My job is the best job. I am
more committed to my job than most.
Nobody is going to get me interested in
some other job or activity. There's a
big difference between myself and a lot
of the people who fade away. They just
aren't as interested in what the next
stage requires and fitting into the role
it requires in terms of starting a
company and running it 21 years later.
It's surprising that this is not more
common. And I love what he says here.
I've always rejected the term
entrepreneur because it implies that
you're an entrepreneur first and a
software creator second. I didn't say,
"Oh, I'll start a company. What will it
be? Cookies, bread, software?" No, I'm a
software engineer, and I decided to
gather a team together. That team grew
over time, built more software products,
and did whatever was needed to drive
that forward. You've got to enjoy what
you do each day for itself and for its
excellence. And then one of the
questions he was asked was about, you
know, you have a very aggressive
reputation for your competitors and
other people in their industry. And his
answer was, what's aggressive? Shipping
a good product, that's aggressive.
Lowering the price of the product so
more people can get it, that's
aggressive. Those are good things. We're
here making good products, taking all
the phone calls, meeting with users,
hiring smart people. That's all our
business